# -0g

The first time I've heard of this flag was while reading "Computer Systems, a
Programmer's Approach". Before that, I've always just used plain `-g`.

According to the man pages:

> If you are not using some other optimization option, consider using -Og with
> -g.  With no -O option at all, some compiler passes that collect information
> useful for debugging do not run at all, so that -Og may result in a better
> debugging experience.

> Most optimizations are completely disabled at -O0 or if an -O level is not
> set on the command line, even if individual optimization flags are specified.
> Similarly, -Og suppresses many optimization passes.

> -Og should be the optimization level of choice for the standard
> edit-compile-debug cycle, offering a reasonable level of optimization while
> maintaining fast compilation and a good debugging experience.  It is a better
> choice than -O0 for producing debuggable code because some compiler passes
> that collect debug information are disabled at -O0.

> Like -O0, -Og completely disables a number of optimization passes so that
> individual options controlling them have no effect.  Otherwise -Og enables
> all -O1 optimization flags except for those that may interfere with
> debugging:

> -fbranch-count-reg
> -fdelayed-branch
> -fdse
> -fif-conversion
> -fif-conversion2
> -finline-functions-called-once
> -fmove-loop-invariants
> -fmove-loop-stores
> -fssa-phiopt
> -ftree-bit-ccp
> -ftree-dse
> -ftree-pta
> -ftree-sra

Note that the flag `-0` referred by the documentation is an alias for `-01`,
which is defined by:

> -O1 Optimize.  Optimizing compilation takes somewhat more time, and a lot
> more memory for a large function.

> With -O, the compiler tries to reduce code size and execution time, without
> performing any optimizations that take a great deal of compilation time.

> -O turns on the following optimization flags:
> -fauto-inc-dec
> -fbranch-count-reg
> -fcombine-stack-adjustments
> -fcompare-elim
> -fcprop-registers
> -fdce
> -fdefer-pop
> -fdelayed-branch
> -fdse
> -fforward-propagate
> -fguess-branch-probability
> -fif-conversion
> -fif-conversion2
> -finline-functions-called-once
> -fipa-modref
> -fipa-profile
> -fipa-pure-const
> -fipa-reference
> -fipa-reference-addressable
> -fmerge-constants
> -fmove-loop-invariants
> -fmove-loop-stores
> -fomit-frame-pointer
> -freorder-blocks
> -fshrink-wrap
> -fshrink-wrap-separate
> -fsplit-wide-types
> -fssa-backprop
> -fssa-phiopt
> -ftree-bit-ccp
> -ftree-ccp
> -ftree-ch
> -ftree-coalesce-vars
> -ftree-copy-prop
> -ftree-dce
> -ftree-dominator-opts
> -ftree-dse
> -ftree-forwprop
> -ftree-fre
> -ftree-phiprop
> -ftree-pta
> -ftree-scev-cprop
> -ftree-sink
> -ftree-slsr
> -ftree-sra
> -ftree-ter
> -funit-at-a-time
