# Exercise 1.5

## Pre-exercise theory

### Applicative-order evaluation

In this evaluation, the interpreter evaluates the elements of the operation
and then applies the procedure. For example:

```scm
(* (+ 2 (* 4 6)) (+ 3 5 7))

; The interpreter first evaluates (* 4 6)
; reducing the operation to:
(* (+ 2 (24)) (+ 3 5 7))

; The interpreter then reduces (+ 2 (24))
(* (26) (+ 3 5 7))

; The interpreter then reduces (+ 3 5 7)
(* (26) (15))

; And then yields the result
390
```

### Normal-order evaluation

All the operators are expanded until only "primitives" are left, then, only at
the end, the reduction is performed:

```scm
(sum-of-squares (+ 5 1) (* 5 2))

; becomes
(+ (square (+ 5 1)) (square (* 5 2)))

; becomes
(+ (* (+ 5 1) (+ 5 1)) (* (* 5 2) (* 5 2)))

; becomes
(+ (* 6 6) (* 10 10))

; becomes
(+ (36) (100))

; becomes
136
```

### Further

Lisp uses the applicative-order evaluation because it can avoid multiple
evaluation of expressions as in the example above with (+ 5 1) and (* 5 2) and
because normal-order is very complicated when procedures can't be modelled by
substitution.


## The question

> Ben Bitdiddle has invented a test to determine whether the interpreter he is
> faced with is using applicative-order evaluation or normal-order evaluation.
> He defines the following two procedures:

```scm
(define (p) (p))

(define (test x y)
        (if (= x 0) 0 y)
)
```

> Then he evaluates the expression:

```scm
(test 0 (p))
```

> What behaviour will Ben observe with an interpreter that uses
> applicative-order evaluation? What behaviour will he observe with an
> interpreter that uses normal-order evaluation? Explain your answer. (Assume
> that the evaluation rule for the special form `if` is the same whether the
> interpreter is using normal or applicative order. The predicate expression is
> evaluated first, and the result determines whether to evaluate the consequent
> or the alternative expression).

## Answer

Using applicative-order evaluation, we have the following reductions:


```scm
; p is evaluated and returns itself.
(test 0 (p))

; try to evaluate (p) again, because
; the expression hasn't been reduced.
(test 0 (p))

; stays in an infinite loop because
; (p) can never be evaluated.
```

Running the above in guile never returns.

In normal-order evaluation, everything must be expanded first.

```scm
(test 0 (p))

; becomes
(if (= 0 0) 0 (p))

; becomes
(if (#t) 0 (p))

; resolves to:
0
```
