# Exercise 1.6

## Pre-exercise theory

First of all, this question is based on the procedures `good-enough?`,
`improve`, `guess`, `improve`, and `sqrt-iter` that have just been
written in the section prior to the exercise.

These procedures are layed out below:

```scm
(define (average x y)
        (/ (+ x y) 2)
)

(define (improve guess x)
        (average guess (/ x guess))
)

(define (square x)
        (* x x)
)

(define (good-enough? guess x)
        (< (abs (- (square guess) x)) 0.001)
)

(define (sqrt-iter guess x)
        (if (good-enough? guess x)
            guess
            (sqrt-iter (improve guess x) x)
        )
)

(define (sqrt x)
        (sqrt-iter 1.0 x)
)
```

## Question

> Alyssa P. Hacker doesn't see why `if` needs to be provided as a special form.
> "Why can't I just define it as an ordinary procedure in terms of `cond`?" she
> asks. Alyssa's friend Eva Lu Ator claims this can indeed be done, and she
> defines a new version of `if`:

```scm
(define (new-if predicate then-clause else-clause)
        (cond (predicate then-clause) (else else-clause))
)
```

> Eva demonstrates the program for Alyssa:

```scm
(new-if (= 2 3) 0 5)
; 5

(new-if (= 1 1) 0 5)
; 0
```

> Delighted, Alyssa uses new-if to rewrite the square-root program:

```scm
(define (sqrt-iter guess x)
        (new-if (good-enough? guess x)
                guess
                (sqrt-iter (improve guess x)
                           x
                )
        )
)
```

## Answer

If one tries to run the program above with that alteration, it will never
resolve as it will turn into an infinite loop.

The `else-clause` includes a recursion to the function itself, and the Scheme
interpreter can't deal with recursions in this way as shown in exercise 1.5.

With the `new-if` function being a procedure, the interpreter will try to
evaluate both arguments before applying the reduction due to the
applicative-order evaluation nature of the interpreter.

The `if` conditional is different. It only evaluates the predicate and _then_
it evaluates which condition needs to run next.

Essentially, it is not possible to mimic the `cond` and `if` operators because
they do not follow applicative-order evaluation.
